CONTRIBUTING.md: shorten for readability (#421104)
NixOS/nixpkgs: CONTRIBUTING.md

0. Set up a local version of Nixpkgs to work with:
   1. [Fork](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/fork-a-repo#forking-a-repository) the [Nixpkgs repository](https://github.com/nixos/nixpkgs).
   1. [Clone the forked repository](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/fork-a-repo#cloning-your-forked-repository) into a local `nixpkgs` directory.
   1. [Configure the upstream Nixpkgs repository](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/fork-a-repo#configuring-git-to-sync-your-fork-with-the-upstream-repository).

1. Select the appropriate [base branch](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/about-branches#working-with-branches) for the change, as [described here][branch].
   If in doubt, use `master`.
   This can be changed later by [rebasing][rebase].

2. Create a new Git branch, ideally such that:
   - The name of the branch hints at your change, e.g. `update-hello`.
   - The branch contains the most recent base branch.

   We'll assume the base branch `master` here.

   ```bash
   # Make sure you have the latest changes from upstream Nixpkgs
   git fetch upstream

>    # Create and switch to a new branch based on the base branch in Nixpkgs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   # Create and switch to a new branch, based on the base branch in Nixpkgs
```

     Useful Git commands for this are `git commit --patch --amend` and `git rebase --interactive`.
     With a rewritten history you need to force-push the commits:
     ```
     git push --force-with-lease
     ```

   - In case of merge conflicts, you will have to [rebase the branch](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Branching-Rebasing) on top of the current **base branch**.
     Sometimes this can be done [on GitHub directly](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/keeping-your-pull-request-in-sync-with-the-base-branch#updating-your-pull-request-branch).
     To rebase locally:
     ```
     git fetch upstream
     git rebase upstream/master
     git push --force-with-lease
     ```

     Use the base branch from step 1 instead of `upstream/master`.

   - If you need to change the base branch, [rebase][rebase].

8. If your PR is merged and [acceptable for releases][release-acceptable], you may [backport][pr-backport] it.

### Pull request template
[pr-template]: #pull-request-template

The pull request template helps to determine which steps have been taken so far.

> The motivation section should include details the title does not address and link existing related issues.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Details not covered by the title and any links to existing related issues should go at the top.
```

The "Motivation" header has been removed

> When a PR is created, it will be pre-populated with these checkboxes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a PR is created, it will be pre-populated with checkboxes discussed:
```

This phrasing enables some wiggle room should the pr template and contributing guide drift

#### Tested using sandboxing

When sandbox builds are enabled, Nix will set up an isolated environment for each build process.
It is used to remove further hidden dependencies set by the build environment, to improve reproducibility.
This includes access to the network during the build outside of `fetch*` functions and files outside the Nix store.
Depending on the operating system, access to other resources is blocked as well; see [sandbox](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/conf-file#conf-sandbox) in the Nix manual for details.

> Please test builds with sandboxing enabled, because it is also used in [Hydra](https://nixos.org/hydra).

Reviewer 2: I often see builds fail on the nix-community darwin builder where the sandbox is enabled, that then go on to succeed on hydra. As such I assume at least local networking is relaxed on hydra?

#### Built on platform(s)

Many Nix packages are designed to run on multiple platforms.

> It’s important to let the maintainer know which platforms you have tested on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As such, it’s important to let the maintainer know which platforms you have tested on.
```

While i will champion active direct language any day, some mental breaks and connective tissue is needed for readability

> It’s not always practical to test on all platforms, and it’s not required for a pull request to be merged.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It’s not always practical to test all platforms, and it’s not required for a pull request to be merged.
```

nix-shell -p nixpkgs-review --run "nixpkgs-review wip"
```

Review changes from the last commit:

```ShellSession
nix-shell -p nixpkgs-review --run "nixpkgs-review rev HEAD"
```

#### Tested execution of all binary files (usually in `./result/bin/`)

It’s important to test generated executables.
Look into `./result/bin` and run all files in there, or at a minimum, the main executable.
For example, if you make a change to `texlive`, you probably would only check the binaries associated with the change you made, rather than testing all of them.

#### Meets Nixpkgs contribution standards

The last checkbox is about whether it fits the guidelines in this `CONTRIBUTING.md` file.

> This document has detailed information on standards for commit messages, reviews, licensing of contributions, etc...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document details on our standards for commit messages, reviews, licensing of contributions, etc...
```

Everyone should read and understand these standards before submitting a pull request.

### Rebasing between branches (i.e. from master to staging)
[rebase]: #rebasing-between-branches-ie-from-master-to-staging

Sometimes, changes must be rebased between branches.

> One example is, if the number of rebuilds caused is too large for the target branch.

Reviewer: I think the confusion comes from the subtle difference between references (like branches) and specific revisions (i.e. commits).

Sometimes you'll see this subtlety reflected in PR API payloads, such as `pull_request.base.sha`, but usually the user-facing side of GitHub only shows the branch name you intend to merge into, calling it the "base branch".

---

Essentially, the base and target _commits_ may differ, but they are always on the same branch.

Unless you are merging with `--allow-unrelated-histories` (which would've been done when NixOS and nixpk gs were merged into a monorepo)... In that niche scenario, there is **no** base commit at all, only a base/target branch.

---

I do agree that "target" is a better name for the branch you wish to merge into, however as you pointed out, GitHub calls it the "base" branch. Hence, I question whether we should be consistent?

> One example is, if the number of rebuilds is too large for the target branch.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One example is, if the number of rebuilds caused is too large for the target base branch.
```

> In the following, the current `feature` branch is based on `master`, and we rebase it to have the PR target `staging`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the following example, the current `feature` branch is based on `master`, and we rebase it to have the PR target `staging`.
```

> We rebase on the merge base between `master` and `staging` to avoid too many local rebuilds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We rebase on the _merge base_ between `master` and `staging` to avoid too many local rebuilds.
```

- Focus on the proposed changes and keep the scope narrow.
- Help the contributor prioritise their efforts towards getting their change merged.

If you find anything related that could be improved but is not immediately required for acceptance, consider:
- Implementing the changes yourself in a follow-up pull request,
- Tracking your idea in an issue,
- Offering to review a follow-up pull request,
- Making concrete [suggestions](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/reviewing-changes-in-pull-requests/incorporating-feedback-in-your-pull-request) in the same pull request.

For example, follow-up changes could involve refactoring code in the affected files.

But please remember not to make such additional considerations a blocker, and communicate that to the contributor, for example by following the [conventional comments](https://conventionalcomments.org) pattern.
If the related change is essential for the contribution at hand, make clear why you think it is important to address that first.

Pull request reviews should include a list of what has been reviewed in a comment, so other reviewers and mergers can know the state of the review.

> All the review templates provided are generic and examples.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All the review templates provided are generic examples.
```

For other pull requests, please see [I opened a PR, how do I get it merged?](#i-opened-a-pr-how-do-i-get-it-merged).

In case the PR is stuck waiting for the author to apply a trivial change and the author allowed members to modify the PR, consider applying it yourself.
You should pay extra attention to make sure the addition doesn't go against the idea of the original PR and would not be opposed by the author.

Please see the discussion in [GitHub nixpkgs issue #321665](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/321665) for information on how to proceed to be granted this level of access.

In a case a contributor leaves the Nix community, they should create an issue or post on [Discourse](https://discourse.nixos.org) with references to packages and modules they maintain so they can be taken over by other contributors.

# Flow of merged pull requests

After a pull request is merged, it eventually makes it to [Hydra](https://hydra.nixos.org).
Hydra regularly evaluates and builds Nixpkgs, updating [the official channels](https://channels.nixos.org) when their jobs succeed.
See [Nix Channel Status](https://status.nixos.org) for the current channels and their state.

> Our main Git branches and the related channels are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Our main Git branches and the related channels are:
```

Reviewer 2: (note the preceding newline)

- `master`: The main branch, used for the unstable channels `nixos-unstable`, `nixos-unstable-small` and `nixpkgs-unstable`.
- `release-YY.MM`: The release branches, used for the stable channels `nixos-YY.MM`, `nixos-YY.MM-small` and `nixpkgs-YY.MM-darwin`.

> When a channel is updated, the corresponding branch is also updated to the same commit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a channel is updated, its corresponding branch is also updated to the same commit.
```

## How to backport pull requests
[pr-backport]: #how-to-backport-pull-requests

Once a PR has been merged, a backport to the corresponding `release-YY.MM` branch can be created.

### Automatically backporting changes

> [!Note]
> You have to be a [Nixpkgs maintainer](./maintainers) to automatically create a backport pull request.

Add the [`backport release-YY.MM` label](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/labels?q=backport) to the PR on the `master` branch.
This will cause [a GitHub Action](.github/workflows/backport.yml) to open a new PR to the `release-YY.MM` branch a few minutes later.
This can be done on both open or already merged pull requests.

### Manually backporting changes

To manually create a backport, follow [the standard pull request process][pr-create], but:

- Use `release-YY.MM` for the base branch, both for the local branch and the pull request.

> [!Warning]

> > Do not use the `nixos-YY.MM` branch, which is pointing to the tested release channel commit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Do not use the `nixos-YY.MM` branch. It points to the latest _tested_ release channel commit.
```

- Instead of manually making and committing the changes, use [`git cherry-pick -x`](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-cherry-pick) for each commit.

>   Either `git cherry-pick -x <commit>` when the reason is obvious (such as minor versions, fixes, etc.), otherwise use `git cherry-pick -xe <commit>` to add a reason for the backport.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Either `git cherry-pick -x <commit>` when the backport reason is obvious (e.i. minor version bumps, fixes, etc.), or use `git cherry-pick -xe <commit>` to add additional backport motivation.
```

## How to review pull requests
[pr-review]: #how-to-review-pull-requests

The Nixpkgs project receives a high number of pull requests.
Reviewing and approving these is an important way to contribute to the project.

The high change rate makes any PR that remains open for too long subject to merge conflicts.
To avoid extra work, reviewing PRs timely and being responsive is key.
GitHub provides sort filters to see the [most recently updated](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pulls?q=is%3Apr+is%3Aopen+sort%3Aupdated-desc) pull requests.

> We highly encourage looking at [this list of ready to merge, unreviewed pull requests](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pulls?q=is%3Apr%20is%3Aopen%20review%3Anone%20status%3Asuccess%20no%3Aproject%20no%3Aassignee%20no%3Amilestone%20).

Reviewer 2: This changed url redirects back

Reviewer 2: It is also missing the `-label:"2.status: work-in-progress"` in the search field, making any changes the search loose that search term

Reviewer: What's the motivation for replacing `+` with `%20`?

Also, why a trailing `%20`?

All the review templates provided are generic and examples.
Their usage is optional and the reviewer is free to adapt them.

To get more information about how to review specific parts of Nixpkgs, refer to the documents linked to in the [overview section][overview].

If a pull request contains documentation changes that might require feedback from the documentation team, ping [@NixOS/documentation-team](https://github.com/orgs/nixos/teams/documentation-team) on the pull request.

If you have enough knowledge and experience in a topic and would like to be a long-term reviewer for related submissions, please contact the current reviewers for that topic.
The main reviewers for a topic can be hard to find as there is no list, but checking past pull requests or git-blaming the code can give some hints.

## How to merge pull requests yourself
[pr-merge]: #how-to-merge-pull-requests

You can use the nixpkgs-merge-bot by commenting `@NixOS/nixpkgs-merge-bot merge`.
The bot will verify the following conditions, refusing to merge otherwise:

- the PR author should be @r-ryantm or a Nixpkgs committer;

> - the commenter should be among the package maintainers;

Reviewer 2: should we perhaps switch to "invoke" and "invoker" for clarity?

- the package should reside in `pkgs/by-name`.

Further, nixpkgs-merge-bot will ensure all CI checks and the ofborg builds for Linux have successfully completed before merging the pull request.
Should the checks still be underway, the bot will wait for them to finish before attempting the merge again.

For other pull requests, please see [I opened a PR, how do I get it merged?](#i-opened-a-pr-how-do-i-get-it-merged).

In case the PR is stuck waiting for the author to apply a trivial change and the author allowed members to modify the PR, consider applying it yourself.
You should pay extra attention to make sure the addition doesn't go against the idea of the original PR and would not be opposed by the author.

> Please see the discussion in [GitHub nixpkgs issue #321665](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/321665) for information on how to proceed to be granted this level of access.

Reviewer 2: This bit is not really connected to the rest of the text? (maybe out of scope for this PR to fix however)

> In a case a contributor leaves the Nix community, they should create an issue or post on [Discourse](https://discourse.nixos.org) with references to packages and modules they maintain so they can be taken over by other contributors.

Reviewer: > I will rephrase it here and then we can move it later.

I'm impressed you're able to keep track of so many TODOs; you must have some well organised notes!

It works by directing commits that cause [mass rebuilds][mass-rebuild] to a separate `staging` branch that isn't directly built by Hydra.
Regularly, the `staging` branch is _manually_ merged into a `staging-next` branch to be built by Hydra using the [`nixpkgs:staging-next` jobset](https://hydra.nixos.org/jobset/nixpkgs/staging-next).
The `staging-next` branch should then only receive changes that fix Hydra builds; **for anything else, ask the [Staging room](https://matrix.to/#/#staging:nixos.org) first**.
Once it is verified that there are no major regressions, `staging-next` is merged into `master` using [a pull request](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues?q=label%3A%224.workflow%3A%20staging%22).
This is done manually to ensure it's a good use of Hydra's computing resources.

> By keeping the `staging-next` branch separate from `staging`, this does not block developers from merging changes into `staging`.

Reviewer 2: This sentence is unwieldy. 
```suggestion
Since `staging-next` is separate from `staging`, you may merge changes changes into `staging` at any time.
```
I'd love to somehow work the mental hook "block" into the sentence however.

Perhaps?
```suggestion
Since `staging-next` is separate from `staging`, we do not block developers from merging changes into `staging`.
```

## Commit conventions
[commit-conventions]: #commit-conventions

- Create one commit for each logical unit.

- If you have commits `pkg-name: oh, forgot to insert whitespace`: squash commits in this case.
  Use `git rebase -i`.
  See [Squashing Commits](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Tools-Rewriting-History#_squashing) for additional information.

- For consistency, there should not be a period at the end of the commit message's summary line (the first line of the commit message).

> - When adding yourself as maintainer, make a separate commit with the message `maintainers: add <handle>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When registering yourself as maintainer, make a separate commit with the message `maintainers: add <handle>`.
```

  Add the commit before those making changes to the package or module.
  See [Nixpkgs Maintainers](./maintainers/README.md) for details.

- Make sure you read about any commit conventions specific to the area you're touching.
  See:
  - [Commit conventions](./doc/README.md#commit-conventions) for changes to `doc`, the Nixpkgs manual.
  - [Commit conventions](./lib/README.md#commit-conventions) for changes to `lib`.
  - [Commit conventions](./nixos/README.md#commit-conventions) for changes to `nixos`.

>   - [Commit conventions](./pkgs/README.md#commit-conventions) for changes to `pkgs`.

Reviewer 2: I get that this is alphabetical, but `pkgs/` is the hot path and should IMO be on top.

To contribute effectively and efficiently, you need to be aware of how the process generally works.
This section aims to document the process as we live it in Nixpkgs to set the right expectations and give practical tips on how to work with it.

## I opened a PR, how do I get it merged?
[i-opened-a-pr-how-do-i-get-it-merged]:#i-opened-a-pr-how-do-i-get-it-merged

In order for your PR to be merged, a committer needs to review and merge it.
Because committers are mostly independent, unpaid volunteers, this can take time.
It is entirely normal for your PR to sit around without any feedback for days, weeks or sometimes even months.
We strive to avoid this, but the reality is that it happens frequently.
Even when you get feedback, follow-ups may take just as long.
Don't be intimidated and kindly ask for feedback again every so often.
If your change is good, it will eventually be merged.

You can often speed up the process by understanding the committer's perspective and preparing your PR with reviewing in mind.

### The committer's perspective

PRs have varying quality and even the best people make mistakes.
Committers need to assess whether a PR's changes are good or not.

> To merge, at least one committer has to be convinced of its quality enough.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To merge, at least one committer has to be convinced of its quality.
```

or

```suggestion
To merge, at least one committer has to be confident of its quality.
```

Committers typically assess three aspects:

1. Whether the change's intention is necessary and desirable.
2. Whether the code quality of your changes is good.

> 3. Whether the produced artifacts are good.

Reviewer: This last bullet point feels _very_ vague. I'm not convinced "artifacts" is a useful term here to communicate what it's trying to say.

I'm not even sure whether it's saying "packages built" or "the final code, after applying the PR's patches", or something else...

Not really an issue with your change, just that the existing wording is poor.

I believe the three bullet points are trying to say:

1. intention/motivation/justification necessity/desirability
2. patches/diff quality
3. final/merged quality

But I'm not 100% sure.

Reviewer: > For a package, the artifact would be the result of the build. Does the build even work? Do the produced binaries work? etc.
> 
> For a NixOS module, this is different.
> 
> For a new function in `lib` - entirely different, again.
> 
> I think this is what is meant with "artifacts". Aka the "result of what the code _does_".

That makes sense. But I guess my confusion highlights that the terminology may not be clear to new contributors.

Not really an issue with your PR, but with the existing wording.

It's best to explain *why* you've made your change, because guessing the intention is not always possible.
This does not apply to trivial changes like version updates, because the intention is obvious.
For more nuanced changes or even major version upgrades, it helps if you explain the background behind your change.
For example, if you're adding a package, explain what it is and why it should be in Nixpkgs.
This goes hand in hand with [Writing good commit messages](#writing-good-commit-messages).

To show the quality of your code, you should focus on making it *reviewable*.
First, take a look at your code changes yourself and try to put yourself into the shoes of someone who didn't just write that code.
Would you immediately know what the code does or why it is needed by glancing at it?
If not, reviewers will notice this and will ask you to clarify the code by refactoring it and/or adding code comments.
Doing this preemptively can save a lot of time.
Doing multiple unrelated changes in a single commit can become hard to review quickly.
Thus, consider dividing your change into multiple atomic commits.
There is a balance to strike however: over-fragmentation causes friction.

> The artifacts are the hardest to assess because PRs touch all sorts of components: applications, libraries, NixOS modules, editor plugins and many other things.

Reviewer: Second time seeing "artifacts" used. Again, maybe this is a "me" issue, but I'm not clear what it means in this context.

Looking at the full file, "artifact" is present 3 times, none of which provide any definition or clarity. So I think we can treat this as jargon and either rephrase or define.

In this instance, it feels like it's referring back to the 3-point bullet list (despite that being in a different "section").

Sometimes, the CI system simply has a hiccup or the check was broken by someone else before.
Read through the error message; it's usually quite easy to tell whether it is caused by changes to the component you touched.
If it is indeed caused by your change, try to fix it.
Don't be afraid of asking for advice if you're uncertain how to do that, others might have fixed such issues already and can help you out.
Your PR will not be merged when CI is still failing.

ofborg builds can often get stuck, particularly in PRs targeting `staging` and in builders for the Darwin platform.
Reviewers will know how to handle them or when to ignore them.
Don't worry about it.
However, if there is a build failure and it was caused by your change, you need to investigate it.
If ofborg reveals the build to be broken on a platform that you don't have access to, you should set your package's `meta.broken` accordingly.

When in any doubt, please ask via comment or through one of the help channels.

## I received a review, how do I get it over the finish line?

Most likely, a reviewer wants you to change a few things or requires further input.

> A reviewer may have taken a look at the code and it looked good to them ("Diff LGTM"), but they still need to be convinced of the artifact's quality.

Reviewer: This is the third and final usage of "artifact" in the document.

> They might also be waiting on input from other users or its maintainer on whether the intention of your PR makes sense.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They might also be waiting on input from other users or maintainers on whether the intention of your PR makes sense.
```

?

If you know of people who could help clarify any of this, please bring the PR to their attention.
The current state of the PR is frequently not clearly communicated, so please don't hesitate to ask about it if it's unclear to you.

It's also possible for the reviewer to not be convinced that your PR is necessary or that the method you've chosen is the right one.

Please explain your intentions and reasoning to the committer in such a case.
There may be constraints you had to work with which they're not aware of or qualities of your approach that they didn't immediately notice.
If these weren't clear to the reviewer, that's a good sign you should explain them in your commit message or code comments!

There are some further pitfalls and realities to be aware of:

### Aim to reduce cycles

> It will take a while for the reviewer to get back to you after you respond.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It will usually take a while for the reviewer to get back to you after you respond.
```

or
```suggestion
You should expect it to take a while for the reviewer to get back to you.
```

or

```suggestion
Please be prepared for it to take a while for the reviewer to get back to you, after you respond.
```
or

```suggestion
Be prepared for it to take a while for the reviewer to get back to you after you respond.
```

?

This is simply the reality of projects at the scale of Nixpkgs.
As such, make sure to respond to _all_ feedback at once.
It wastes everyone's time to wait for a couple of days just to have the reviewer need to remind you to address something they asked for.

### A reviewer requested a bunch of insubstantial changes

The people involved in Nixpkgs care about code quality.
Once in Nixpkgs, the code needs to be maintained for many years to come.
Therefore, you will likely be asked to do something different or adhere to a standard.

Sometimes however, they also care a bit too much and may ask you to adhere to a personal preference of theirs.

> It's not always easy to tell which is which and whether the requested changes are required to merge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's not always easy to tell whether the requested changes must be addressed.
```

```suggestion
It's not always easy to tell whether or not the requested changes must be addressed.
```

?

> Sometimes, another reviewer may also have a different opinion on some points, too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes, another reviewer may even have a different opinion on some points.
```

```suggestion
Sometimes, another reviewer may even have a _conflicting_ opinion on some points.
```
